gh-124370: Add "howto" for free-threaded Python (#124371)
python/cpython: Doc/howto/free-threading-python.rst

.. _freethreading-python-howto:

*********************************

> Python Support for Free Threading

Reviewer: Nit:

> In the Python documentation, the use of sentence case in section titles is preferable, but consistency within a unit is more important than following this rule.

https://devguide.python.org/documentation/style-guide/#capitalization

```suggestion
Python support for free threading
```

*********************************

Starting with the 3.13 release, CPython has experimental support for running

> with the :term:`global interpreter lock` (GIL) disabled in a configuration

Reviewer 2: "configuration" makes me think of a configuration file I might need to create. Can we say "build of Python"? Or at least "build configuration".

called :term:`free threading`.  This document describes the implications of
free threading for Python code.  See :ref:`freethreading-extensions-howto` for

> information on how to write C extensions that support the free-threaded build.

Reviewer 2: We seem to switch between "free threading" and "free-threaded" kind of randomly.  I can't decide if this is OK or if we should choose one and stick with it.

Author: I think it's fine. We also say both "multithreaded" and "multithreading" depending on the context.

> 

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we could add a quick snapshot of the overall plan: if everything works out, eventually free threading will be the only build, etc. Also, maybe a statement about how most programmer won't need to be concerned with this, we're doing a lot to keep everyday Python programs behaving the same, etc.

Reviewer 3: I would perhaps add a note in the seealso block that refers to the PEP and adds 1 or 2 highlights:
- performance conscious users may wish to try the free threaded version
- most users can safely continue to use the default CPython version
- when free threading is no longer experimental, the versions will converge into one version for all.

Installation
============

> Starting with Python 3.13.0b2, the offical macOS and Windows installers

Reviewer: 3.13.0 final is the next release: maybe we can gloss over the actual pre-release it was added? Plus a typo:

```suggestion
Starting with Python 3.13, the official macOS and Windows installers
```

optionally support installing free-threaded Python binaries.  The installers
are available at https://www.python.org/downloads/.

.. seealso::

   `Installing a Free-Threaded Python
   <https://py-free-threading.github.io/installing_cpython/>`_:
   A community-maintained installation guide for installing free-threaded
   Python.

> Identifying Free-Threaded Python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Identifying free-threaded Python
```

================================

The free-threaded build of CPython can optionally run with the global
interpreter lock enabled, such as when :envvar:`PYTHON_GIL` is set to ``1``,

> or when importing an extension module that requires the GIL.

Reviewer 2: This could use more explanation.  When might I want to set this environment variable?  "an extension module that requires the GIL": is this something I have to figure out, or does Python know this itself somehow?

Author: I don't want to get into the details of the environment variable here. The important point here is that the free-threaded build can run with the GIL enabled -- that's not obvious to most people. The environment variable is  mentioned here just as an example of that.

The :func:`sys._is_gil_enabled` function will return ``False`` if the global
interpreter lock is currently disabled.  This is the recommended mechanism for

> decisions like whether to use multithreading or multiprocessing.

Reviewer 2: Is it likely that people will write code that examines this variable and chooses between multithreading and multiprocessing? It seems unlikely to me, but maybe library authors will?  When should it be used?

Author: "How do I distinguish between the free-threaded and GIL-enabled build?" is a fairly common question, although I don't think people make much use of it other than for quick debugging and sanity checks.

Reviewer 3: I would break this section into two sections:
- Identifying free threading builds (with the last paragraph)
- Reenabling the GIL with a free threading build (first two paragraphs)

The ``sysconfig.get_config_var("Py_GIL_DISABLED")`` configuration variable can
be used to determine whether the build supports free threading.  If the variable
is set to ``1``, then the build supports free threading.  This is the recommended
mechanism for decisions related to the build configuration.

> Thread Safety

Reviewer 4: I feel like this section is probably among the most important for most users. As I understand it, the general rule is that you write thread-safe code under free-threading the same way that you'd write thread-safe code under previous versions of Python; the rules have not really changed. That could be made more explicit.

Author: I think that's our goal for the implementation, but I'm a bit hesitant to promise too much here, especially because it's not always clear what was thread-safe under the GIL.

> Thread Safety

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thread safety
```

=============

The free-threaded build of CPython aims to provide similar thread-safety
behavior at the Python level to the GIL-enabled build.  Built-in
types like :class:`dict`, :class:`list`, and :class:`set` use internal locks
to protect against concurrent modifications in ways that behave similarly to
the GIL.  However, Python has not historically guaranteed specific behavior for
concurrent modifications to these built-in types, so this should be treated
as a description of the current implementation, not a guarantee of future
behavior.

.. note::

   It's recommended to use the :class:`threading.Lock` or other synchronization
   primitives instead of relying on the internal locks of built-in types, when
   possible.

> Known Limitations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Known limitations
```

=================

This section describes known limitations of the free-threaded CPython build.

Immortalization
---------------

The free-threaded build of the 3.13 release makes some objects :term:`immortal`
in order to avoid reference count contention that would prevent efficient
multi-threaded scaling.  This means that these objects are never deallocated.

> This is expected to be addressed in Python 3.14 with

Reviewer 2: "addressed" how?  That makes it sound like immortal objects are a problem.  Are they?

> This expected to be addressed in the upcoming 3.14 release with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is expected to be addressed in Python 3.14 with
```

> `deferred reference counting <https://peps.python.org/pep-0703/#deferred-reference-counting>`_.

Reviewer 5: At this point, I think it would be a good idea to add a glossary term for deferred reference counting, especially if we're going towards adding a C API for it -- the only documentation on it seems to be the PEP.

Reviewer 6: Alternatively, we could omit the reference to DRC and only state that we intend to address this in 3.14. It's an implementation detail that most users shouldn't need to care about.

Reviewer 5: It is, but we're working towards adding some [extra support](https://github.com/capi-workgroup/decisions/issues/42) for it anyway, so we need to document it somehow. As long as we mention it's an implementation detail in the glossary, users shouldn't rely on it.

Author: We can add additional glossary items later. I think it's more relevant for 3.14 when we have actually implemented deferred reference counting.

The objects that are immortalized are:

* :ref:`function <user-defined-funcs>` objects declared at the module level
* :ref:`method <instance-methods>` descriptors
* :ref:`code <code-objects>` objects
* :term:`module` objects and their dictionaries

> * :ref:`classes <classes>` (type objects)

Reviewer 5: It's probably worth noting somewhere in here that these objects (and immortalization itself) are implementation details, and very much subject to change.

The immortalization of these objects happens the first time a thread is started

> after the main thread.

Reviewer 2: After reading about immortalization, I don't understand the implications for me as a Python programmer.  Why do I care that they are now immortal? These all sound like things that would have never been deallocated anyway.  Are there unusual circumstances that I should be considering?

Author: Hopefully most people won't care, but some programs create these sorts of things in a loop.

> after the main thread.

Reviewer 5: Does this only happen with `threading`? Or with any extension that calls `PyGILState_Ensure`?

Author: I think `PyGILState_Ensure` from a non-main thread also triggers the behavior.

Reviewer 5: Good to know, probably not worth explicitly noting here.

Additionally, numeric and string literals in the code as well as strings

> returned by :func:`sys.intern` are also interned.  This behavior is expected to

Reviewer 4: Should "interned" be "immortalized"? Seems redundant to say that sys.intern interns strings.

> remainin the 3.14 free-threaded build.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
remain in the 3.14 free-threaded build.
```

> Frame Objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Frame objects
```

-------------

> It is not safe to access :ref:`frame <frame-objects>` objects from other

Reviewer 2: Can you elaborate on how it is not safe? What might happen?

Author: Your program may crash. I'll add it to the guide.

> threads.  This means that :func:`sys._current_frames` is generally not safe to

Reviewer 5: What about `sys._getframe` (if we even have that on 3.13), or `inspect.currentframe`?

Author: They are okay as long as the result is not passed to another thread.

use in a free-threaded build.

Iterators
---------

Sharing the same iterator object between multiple threads is generally not

> safe and threads may see duplicate or missing elements when iterating or crash

Reviewer 7: Is the possible crashing of the interpreter expected to be addressed in 3.14?

As a consequence of iterators not being thread safe, some modules are not safe either (e g. `json`, `itertools`). Should this be mentioned somewhere?

the interpreter.

> Single-Threaded Performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Single-threaded performance
```

---------------------------

The free-threaded build has additional overhead when executing Python code
compared to the default GIL-enabled build.  In 3.13, this overhead is about

> 40% on the `pyperformance <https://pyperformance.readthedocs.io/>`_ suite.

Reviewer 2: This is surprising: the lore around removing the GIL has always been that it was easy, the hard part was doing it without affecting single-threaded performance.  This seems like a significant hit.  I understand it's a work in progress, and performance will be improved, but maybe we could elaborate on that a bit here.

> Programs that spend most of the their time in C extensions or I/O will see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Programs that spend most of their time in C extensions or I/O will see
```

> less of an impact.  This overhead is expected to be reduced in the Python

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
less of an impact.  This overhead is expected to be reduced in Python
```

> 3.14.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
less of an impact.  This overhead is expected to be reduced in Python
3.14.
```

> less of an impact.  This overhead is expected to be reduced in the upcoming
> 3.14 release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
less of an impact.  This overhead is expected to be reduced in the Python
3.14.
```

.. _freethreading-python-howto:

**********************************************
Python experimental support for free threading
**********************************************

Starting with the 3.13 release, CPython has experimental support for running
with the :term:`global interpreter lock` (GIL) disabled in a build of Python

> called :term:`free threading`.  This document describes the implications of

Reviewer 3: I
```suggestion
Starting with the 3.13 release, CPython has experimental support for a build of Python
called :term:`free threading` where the :term:`global interpreter lock` (GIL) is disabled.  This document describes the implications of
```

free threading for Python code.  See :ref:`freethreading-extensions-howto` for
information on how to write C extensions that support the free-threaded build.

.. seealso::

   :pep:`703` – Making the Global Interpreter Lock Optional in CPython for an
   overall description of free-threaded Python.

Installation
============

> Starting with Python 3.13, the official macOS and Windows installers

Reviewer 3: Linux ?

Reviewer 4: We don't provide Linux installers.

Reviewer 8: Right, but we could mention here that people building their own CPython such as on Linux need to use`configure --disable-gil` to create such an installation.

Author: Mostly I want to direct people to https://py-free-threading.github.io/installing_cpython/. That's going to be a lot more comprehensive. There are a lot of ways people install Python!

I can make that part of the body of the text instead of a "see also" section

are available at https://www.python.org/downloads/.

.. seealso::

   `Installing a Free-Threaded Python
   <https://py-free-threading.github.io/installing_cpython/>`_:
   A community-maintained installation guide for installing free-threaded
   Python.

Identifying free-threaded Python
================================

The free-threaded build of CPython can optionally run with the global
interpreter lock enabled, such as when :envvar:`PYTHON_GIL` is set to ``1``,
or automatically when importing an extension module that requires the GIL.

The :func:`sys._is_gil_enabled` function will return ``False`` if the global
interpreter lock is currently disabled.  This is the recommended mechanism for
decisions like whether to use multithreading or multiprocessing.

The ``sysconfig.get_config_var("Py_GIL_DISABLED")`` configuration variable can
be used to determine whether the build supports free threading.  If the variable
is set to ``1``, then the build supports free threading.  This is the recommended
mechanism for decisions related to the build configuration.

Thread safety
=============

The free-threaded build of CPython aims to provide similar thread-safety

> behavior at the Python level to the GIL-enabled build.  Built-in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
behavior at the Python level to the default GIL-enabled build.  Built-in
```

types like :class:`dict`, :class:`list`, and :class:`set` use internal locks
to protect against concurrent modifications in ways that behave similarly to
the GIL.  However, Python has not historically guaranteed specific behavior for
concurrent modifications to these built-in types, so this should be treated

> as a description of the current implementation, not a guarantee of future

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
as a description of the current implementation, not a guarantee of current or future
```

behavior.

.. note::

>    It's recommended to use the :class:`threading.Lock` or other synchronization

Reviewer 3: Nice!

   primitives instead of relying on the internal locks of built-in types, when
   possible.

Known limitations
=================

This section describes known limitations of the free-threaded CPython build.

Immortalization
---------------

The free-threaded build of the 3.13 release makes some objects :term:`immortal`

> in order to avoid reference count contention that would prevent efficient

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which have reference counts that are never modified. Since the immortal object is guaranteed not to be
deallocated, efficient multi-threading scaling is possible by avoiding reference count contention between
threads.
```

Author: I've reworked this a bit. Would you please take another look at it? As you wrote, immortalization means reference counts are not modified and objects are not guaranteed not to be deallocated. I wanted to get across that:

* Reference counts not being modified enables efficient multi-threaded scaling.
* Objects not being deallocated is a potential problem because some applications may leak memory. That's being addressed in 3.14. We don't expect this to be a problem for most applications, but it's something to watch out for if you run your application with refleak checks.

multi-threaded scaling.  This means that these objects are never deallocated.
This is expected to be addressed in Python 3.14 with
`deferred reference counting <https://peps.python.org/pep-0703/#deferred-reference-counting>`_.

> The objects that are immortalized are:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An object will be made immortal when a new thread is started for the first time after the main thread is running.
The following objects are immortalized:
```

after the main thread.

Additionally, numeric and string literals in the code as well as strings
returned by :func:`sys.intern` are also immortalized.  This behavior is
expected to remain in the 3.14 free-threaded build.

Frame objects
-------------

It is not safe to access :ref:`frame <frame-objects>` objects from other
threads and doing so may cause your program to crash .  This means that
:func:`sys._current_frames` is generally not safe to use in a free-threaded
build.  Functions like :func:`inspect.currentframe` and :func:`sys._getframe`
are generally safe as long as the resulting frame object is not passed to
another thread.

Iterators
---------

Sharing the same iterator object between multiple threads is generally not
safe and threads may see duplicate or missing elements when iterating or crash
the interpreter.

Single-threaded performance
---------------------------

The free-threaded build has additional overhead when executing Python code
compared to the default GIL-enabled build.  In 3.13, this overhead is about
40% on the `pyperformance <https://pyperformance.readthedocs.io/>`_ suite.
Programs that spend most of their time in C extensions or I/O will see

> less of an impact.  This overhead is expected to be reduced in Python
> 3.14.   We are aiming for an overhead of 10% or less on the pyperformance

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
less of an impact.  This overhead is expected to be reduced in Python
3.14 by implementing more efficient reference counting and garbage collection.   We are aiming for an overhead of 10% or less on the pyperformance
```

Author: We expect that the biggest source of improvement will be reenabling the specializing adaptive interpreter in 3.14. It's currently disabled in the 3.13 free-threaded build. Is that worth mentioning here?

I don't expect any big performance impact for reference counting and garbage collection changes in 3.14

should be used to build a free-threaded Python interpreter.

Identifying free-threaded Python
================================

To check if the current interpreter supports free-threading, :option:`python -VV <-V>`
and :attr:`sys.version` contain "experimental free-threading build".
The new :func:`sys._is_gil_enabled` function can be used to check whether
the GIL is actually disabled in the running process.

The ``sysconfig.get_config_var("Py_GIL_DISABLED")`` configuration variable can
be used to determine whether the build supports free threading.  If the variable
is set to ``1``, then the build supports free threading.  This is the recommended
mechanism for decisions related to the build configuration.

The global interpreter lock in free-threaded Python
===================================================

Free-threaded builds of CPython support optionally running with the GIL enabled
at runtime using the environment variable :envvar:`PYTHON_GIL` or
the command-line option :option:`-X gil`.

The GIL may also automatically be enabled when importing a C-API extension
module that is not explicitly marked as supporting free threading.  See

> :c:macro:`Py_MOD_GIL_NOT_USED` for more details.

Reviewer 2: Since this document is for Python programmers, I think we should avoid sending them off to look at C macros. As a Python programmer, my question now would be, "how can I tell if my C extensions support free threading or not?"   Is there a way to know without examining the C source code?

Author: I can remove the link and mention of the C macro. There isn't a great answer for "how can I tell if my C extensions support free threading?"
* Read the docs for the package in question. I think this is often the best answer for "does the extensions support 3.13?" or whatever new Python version comes out
* `pip install` it. 
* Check out https://py-free-threading.github.io/tracking/ or https://hugovk.github.io/free-threaded-wheels/
* If the extension is not marked as supporting free-threading, then a warning will be printed when it is imported (and the GIL will be automatically enable)

Reviewer 2: Those are good answers!
